---
layout: post
title:      "Why I decided to enter the world of data science."
date:       2020-04-24 23:00:03 +0000
permalink:  why_i_decided_to_enter_the_world_of_data_science
---


So here we are, 3 years out of college with a work experience background filled only with sales and a bachelors degree in marketing. As many people may know, sales can be a roller coaster of a career, with massive ups and massive downs. With it, comes unpredictability (as much as we'd like to control it) which is how this whole reel of new ideas started to come flooding in. 

While data never spoke to me at birth, technology always has. As a typical millennial, my life is surrounded with tech. So it's been following me my entire life.  Fast forward to graduating college, while I did pick sales as a career path, I always made sure it was in tech. I started off working at a publicly traded company that provided a platform for small to medium sized businesses where users can provide them with reviews (I'm sure you can guess which one). While I enjoyed working for such a big company, with such a big brand. The "relationships" with your "clients" are non existent. I wanted more relationship building that required more strategy. So I was offered a position to work at a leading recruitment firm in NYC. Now again, you're probably thinking, James, this has nothing to do with technology nor data, what gives? Well, I was recruited for a specific role in mind. It was to recruit for sales professionals, within the tech industry in NYC. But as you may have guessed that still wasn't enough for me. After a year with the firm I started to engage with some of the companies I was actually recruiting for. One of the best parts about recruiting for so many different tech companies was that it gave me insights into what they do, how they're different amongst themselves etc. Turns out a lot of these tech companies do a lot of the same thing, especially if you're in the MarTech / AdTech space. I knew that wasn't where I wanted to end up. The startup I actually work at now, reached out to me. They were in NYC, they were in tech, and yet, I had never heard of them. This immediately grabbed my attention, because once I found out more about the company, I learned that they were, and are, currently the only ones doing what they're doing in the space. This ultimately got me to make my most recent move to a new company.

Data science has never been something that's ever crossed my mind for a career path. As I've spent the past year and a half at a tech start up, which has given me a lot of perspective into how a business runs. The part that's currently one of my larger takeaways is the relationships built/maintained through data. The company I work for is B2B, we provide brands with a software that helps them essentially make more money on slow moving inventory with their existing buyers. Think of it as an inventory management system. Now you're probably thinking, this software has nothing to do with data and or analytics. We actually work with a third party vendor to monitor every transaction made between our client and their buyer. All the way from the type of item and even down to it's color. So we're actually able to provide our clients data analytics on all post transactions from using the platform. We give them the data and provide suggestions so that they're able to make smarter and more strategic decisions. This in turn will help make them more money (by lifting margins in certain categories) as well as help them go to market faster (providing more appetizing offers to their buyers). All and all this is really where the data side started to resonate.

Starting in Oct. of 2019 was really when I started to take a deep dive into seeing if this was really for me. I hopped onto Udemy (an online resource for people interested in more technical skills) and I took a $10 python crash course. This was more like doing python coding with training wheels, on steroids. The results were fascinating to me. Something as simple as creating functions and for loops were things I'd look at normally and think, *yeah there's no way I could ever learn that*, but after taking a stab at it and learning the ropes, wow was I excited. Yes, I understand data science is not as simple as doing your basic for loops, but it showed me that I had the ability to learn the skills to becoming a master of data science.

After doing some research online for the best course's to take for data science online, I eventually landed on the Flatiron School. I had multiple friends and colleagues who referenced their name. So, I started the application process to try and get into the program. This program would be 10 months long and take up roughly 25-30 hours outside of my full time nine to five. And guess what? I failed getting into the program. Not once, but twice. Third time ended up being the charm. But that's not the point, the point is that this is something that I wanted for myself. I knew and know that if I want this to happen I am truly going to have to give it my all. Now if you're already technical and you have taken some of these tests to get into one of the programs, you're probably thinking they're a cake walk. And sure, as I'm now two weeks into my program and look back at that exam, it surely was. But during that period of time, I had no idea what I was doing. I'm thankful for the Flatiron School for rejecting me twice, because it allowed me to number one, start taking this thing more seriously, and number two, it showed me that this wasn't going to be as easy as one, two, three. As I mentioned before though, I did get in on the third try.

I'm currently at the end of my second week in the program. I'll be finished come February 2021. Far away right? I'm excited for the journey to come and the skills I'm going to take away from this program. These first two weeks have been challenging. Flatiron doesn't allow you to have training wheels, you're thrown into the thick of it (if you have no technical background) right away. As I'm in the course with more mathematical and technically apt people, I certainly see myself as an underdog amongst the pack. But I'm looking forward to rising the ranks.
